---
title: A Vision of Algocratic Elections
description: 
date: "2022-09-21"
thumbnail: "img/avatar.jpg"
categories:
  - "Észosztás"
tags:
  - "EN"


---
> I am going to write some smart introductory stuff here.

# _Argumentum Ad Populum_

For a while this was the best we had - it was all we had. It seemed like a perfectly reasonable path to consult the hive mind on important matters - a common solution for which we can see many examples throughout history. _Ostrakismos_, the ancient Athenian practice of voting to banish certain individuals from the community – which is where the phrase ’ostracism’ originates from – utilized the same principle of achieving group consensus to determine a citizen’s social fitness. The ostracized were determined to be ineligible to participate in the community based on the democratic vote and were not allowed to return for a period of time, or might have been given the death penalty in some extreme cases.

Another similar procedure takes place in the US legal system to this very day - a jury of twelve randomly selected but theoretically unbiased individuals are placed in a room to deliberate about the guilt or innocence of the accused, based on the admissable scientific and legal evidence. This would always strike me as incredibly odd and old-fashioned, a routine that seems almost superstitious and barbaric. Again, notice this heavy reliance on group consensus, this underlying belief of „safety in numbers”, the core philosophy being, to put it simply: „This many people can certainly not be wrong.”

The problem is, many and even more people have been wrong and will continue to be wrong en masse. Let us not forget how many scientific discoveries have first been disregarded or outright rejected by peers or reigning organizations (e.g. the heliocentric model, germ theory, radio-wave based communication, to only mention a few). Let us also remember that Hitler’s rise to power occured with the support of the majority within a democratic system. (By 1932, the Nazi party became the largest and most popular party in Germany, enjoying nationwide support both from the country’s institutions and private individuals.) Let us bravely face the reality of the vast number of psychopathic or inept public officials legitimized by the popular vote, still in power,  still wreaking havoc, feasting upon of the public’s admiration and resources in a parasitic fashion.
Obviously, the system is not working as it should. The assumption that the most accurate way to successfully assess the leadership potential of a candidate is by relying on the opinion of the majority is starting to seem nonsensical. When we strip it of its pretentious ideology, the democratic election process appears to be nothing more than the upscaled version of your garden variety ’Argumentum Ad Populum’ (appeal to popularity); one of the most common informal fallacies.

# _The Problem With Human Voters_

“The real problem of humanity is the following: We have Paleolithic emotions, medieval institutions and godlike technology.” Edward O. Wilson
Man’s ability to make emotionally unbiased choices is notoriously bad, especially when his intelligence is functionally reduced to the level of the crowd. Truth is, there is no place for emotions, impulses or fears when it comes to the selection process of our political leaders. Our love or dislike of the candidate is irrelevant as long as they are the most suitable based on the data available. Much like skin color, gender, sexual orientation or personal preference for certain ice cream flavors; the presence or absence of charm should not in any way have any impact on our judgement of someone’s competence in this area. Political legitimacy based on charisma, eloquence and likeability is a complete non-sequitur, these qualities only bear relevance to the popularity-based method of selection (a.k.a. the democratic election process) and have nothing to do with the candidate’s actual potential. Pleasant bedside manner is not a reliable future indicator of positive surgical outcomes. Do you want to be operated on by the kind and likeable chump without any knowledge of medical procedures, or would you rather choose the morose and dismissive doctor that has performed thousands of surgeries before? A great communicator  or a stuttering professional? Perfect jawline or deep conscientiousness?
Similarly, glamour and good conversational instincts cannot be counted on as trustworthy markers of excellence in politics. Is it possible that certain neurodivergent individuals – many of whom often exhibit socially awkward  behaviours – might be able to offer extraordinary solutions to locally and globally emerging issues? Would it be fair to say that the current system unfairly (and foolishly) favors extraverted neurotypicals and more importantly, gives an overwhelming and unfair advantage to those with  antisocial traits? (People with antisocial or psychopathic tendencies are characterized by high levels of confidence, superficial charm and a lack of neuroticism. When combined with remarkable oratory skills, esthetically pleasing appearance and powerful manipulative ability, we have our „ideal” candidate for a prosperous career in present-day politics.) 
Elections force voters to agree to an unrealistic social contract. Although we are blatantly incapable of making accurate judgements about a candidates’ character and competencies (due to time constraints, limited brainpower/expertise) we are forced to carry the sole responsibility of making the smartest choice. When things go awry, the blame shifts towards those who voted „wrong” – meanwhile, people at the top reguarly escape accountability. This is gaslighting on a global scale, and we need to learn to reject the blame. 

It is apparent that the aggressive political campaigns we’re subjected to - whether done overtly or covertly (such as in the case of Cambridge Analytica) – are among the many things that wear us down to the point where we lack the mental resilience neccessary to make informed decisions. Human consciousness has been under siege and it’s our critical thinking ability that is the first to go under the ruthless manipulation we’re forced to endure. 
Voters are mentally fatigued individuals who are struggling to make it paycheck to paycheck, typically operating on the physiological baseline of ’fight or flight’. It is no surprise that such people will be likely to engage in mindless tribalism, scapegoating, and reductionism, casting their vote accordingly. It would be unreasonable to expect a healthy, well-off and emotionally stable group of people to be able to consistently predict the suitability of political candidates based on this little information – let alone a broken and financially abused herd of uneducated and psychologically fragile individuals who are also exposed to relentless and continuous brainwashing.
One of the big problems is that it is hard to let go of what we’ve been deluded into thinking is a privilige. The obvious trade-off here is narcissistic supply for the masses. „I am important, I can make my own decisions, my vote matters.” Someone who has potentially failed at every turn in their personal life will be given the illusion that on election day, they can get back in the driver’s seat to regain control. Meanwhile, all we’re really doing is we’re playing Russian roulette with our own future.  (The 2021 post-election attack of the United States Capitol perfectly illustrates the sense of grandiose self-importance that drives voter hysteria.) 
The legitimacy of a ruling elite elected in such a way is highly dubious, its policies and regulations questionable at best, harmful at worst, and any positive outcomes associated with it are incidental. Ideally, all of us should be relieved of the moral obligation to comply with such a suboptimal, outdated and potentially destructive system. 
